Workbench Applications
======================

Behavioral Design
-----------------

-	[Nodal Designer](nodal) - Use a graphical language to specify relations between behavioral nodes; automatically convert behaviors into implementation systems.
	-	[Strand editor (DIL)](dil) - Graphical interface for viewing and editing a segment-level description of a nucleic acid system. Use to view the results of a nodal build, and to generate sequences with a sequence designer. 
-	[Pepper Designer](pepper)
	-	[Pepper intermediate language (PIL)](pil)
-	CRN Designer (coming soon)

Sequence Design
---------------

-	[Web DD](web-dd) - A stochastic, domain-based sequence designer; can be used to design sequences for large systems very quickly by designing a set of noninteracting domains and then threading those domains together to form full strands.
-	[NUPACK](nupack) Thermodynamic sequence designer - Uses Caltech's NUPACK web server to perform multi-objective thermodynamic sequence design. Enter a design using the NUPACK multi-objective sequence design script, select relevant parameters, and click "Design"; the task will be submitted to the Caltech server, and a popup window will be opened taking you to the results page.
-	[Multisubjective](multisubjective) sequence designer

Simulation and Analysis
-----------------------

See [Simulation and Analysis](simulation-analysis)

-	[Reaction Enumerator](enumerator) – Enumerates the possible reactions and intermediate complexes between a set of initial complexes, at domain resolution
-	[NUPACK](nupack) partition function calculation - Uses Caltech's NUPACK web server to compute the minimum free energy secondary structure of a strand or set of strands
-	[Mfold](mfold) partition function calculation and MFE structure determination - Uses the University of Albany's DINAMelt web server to compute the minimum free energy secondary structure and base pair probabilities.
-	[TBI Vienna RNAfold](rnafold) partition function calculation and MFE structure determination - Uses TBI Vienna's RNAfold Websuite to compute the minimum free energy secondary structure of single DNA or RNA strands.

Utilities
---------

-	[Sequence editor](sequence-edit)
-	Segment Threader - Allows an arbitrary set of sequences to be threaded together into a strand. A set of named sequences can be entered using the pane on the left, and a set of strand specifications (e.g. `strand1 = a b c d b* a*`) can be entered on the right. Clicking the "Thread" button will produce a set of sequences on the bottom generated by applying the strand specification rules using the named sequences.  
-	Structure Editor - Accessed by "Tools" > Structure Editor from the main toolbar. Allows simple preview of a secondary structure entered in dot-paren notation. 

