DyNAMiC Intermediate Language (DIL) 
===================================

The DyNAMiC Intermediate Language (DIL) is the intermediate representation generated by the [Nodal compiler](nodal), DyNAMiC. DyNAMiC converts behavioral representations into molecular implementations using a set of pre-defined translation rules; these rules map "node types" to "molecule types." The result of nodal compilation is therefore a segment-level representation of a set of complexes with a number of explicit Watson-Crick complementarity and orthogonality relationships, but no real nucleotide sequences.

The Strand Editor lets you visualize the primary and secondary structure of these complexes, specify sequence constraints for the segments which compose them, and export these structures to various sequence designers.

## Viewing systems

### Complexes pane
The main interface pain displays a grid of complexes. Complexes are displayed as a secondary structure "planar graph." A "View" menu in the lower-right corner of this panel may be used to modify the visualization; bubbles representing the individual nucleotides may be colored according to segment identity, domain identity, or base identity. Alternatively, the bubbles may be hidden and text labels may be used instead.

### Segments pane
Shows the sequences of the segments which compose the system. Segments are discrete regions of sequence complementarity. A segment's sequence can be edited by double clicking on the sequence and typing a new one; the complexes and strands panes will be updated automatically.

### Strands pane
Shows the strands which comprise the system. Strands may not currently be edited directly, but their composite sequence and component segments/domains may be viewed.


## Designing sequences

From the ribbon, DIL systems may be exported to various sequence designers, including [Web DD](web-dd) and [NUPACK](sequence). Clicking these buttons will generate a file and open the requisite sequence designer.

