File Management
===============

Workbench has a flexible system for storing and managing files, in order to make the round-trip workflow between various applications a lot easier.

Creating files
--------------

You can easily create files within the Workbench interface:

1.	Select "New" from the main menu bar
2.	Enter a filename (you can choose to omit the file extension; Workbench will add it)
3.	From the menu under "Create," select the type of file you would like to create. Your new file should appear in the tree on the left (labeled "Files"), and should open automatically.
	There are some file types which are not currently available in Workbench, but for which support is planned; these appear as greyed out menu items.
4.	Later, you can re-open the file by double-clicking on its name in the Files tree, or right-clicking and selecting "Open" from the context menu.

Uploading files
---------------

To upload a file to Workbench from your desktop, just drag and drop the file from your normal file manager (Finder, Nautilus, Windows Explorer, etc.) onto the Files tree. Your new file will appear once it's been uploaded (you should see a notification). 

Downloading files
-----------------

To download a file, right click on the file name in the Files tree, and select "Download"; it will download as an attachment in a new window.

Renaming files
--------------

To rename a file, right click on the file name in the Files tree, and select the "Rename" field, where you can enter a new file name. As soon as you leave the field,
your file will be renamed.

You can also drag and drop files in the tree in order to arrange them to different folders.

**Note:** Workbench creates some special files, which cannot be renamed. These files are used to store system information, such as preferences or the contents of `.package` files (see "Packages" below). You can edit these files if you wish, but you cannot rename them.

Deleting files
--------------

To delete a file, right click on the file name and select "Delete". Files deleted by Workbench cannot be recovered, unless they are independently backed up

Advanced information
--------------------

### Home directory

Each [user](users) gets a home directory on the Workbench server. This directory corresponds to that user's email address. On hosted versions of Workbench, 
that directory will generally be made available to users via SFTP or SSH. If you're hosting your own version of the Workbench Server, the "files" directory
(where all users' files are stored) is available as a VirtualBox "[shared folder](http://www.virtualbox.org/manual/ch04.html#sharedfolders)" between the virtual machine where Workbench Server runs, and your host machine. During [Installation](install) you should be prompted for this location. Once you've used workbench 
a bit, you can access your files using your normal file manager (Finder, Nautilus, Windows Explorer), as well as managing them through the workbench user 
interface. Just navigate to your home directory within `(shared folder)/files/(your email address)`.


### Packages 

Packages are special folders which contain lots of files, but largely one useful set of data. They were introduced because some [server tools](server-tools), e.g. [NUPACK](nupack), generate lots of files, which are sort of cryptic on their own, but much more useful when aggregated together into a single file. However, it may sometimes be useful to look or use the original file generated by the NUPACK executable; to address this, Workbench provides the following bargain:

-	For certain server tools, the multi-file output is directed to a single folder.
-	Contents of that folder are intelligenly aggregated into a single file.
-	The folder is given a ".package" extension (but remains a folder, so you can open and browse it like any other)
-	A "Package contents" file is written to the folder; this allows you to double-click the package itself (from the Files tree) to see the aggregated version, or to
	expand the package like any other folder, and view the individual output files generated by the server tool.
	
There is another kind of package file, called an Application Bundle, which can be used for creating custom Workbench applications. See [customization](customization) for details.
